---
layout: post
title:  "Motion, force & momentum"
category: engineering-notes
tags: force physics engineering speed acceleration
---

Isaac Newton's three laws of motion set in place some of the most
important aspects of modern physics, and the wider sciences. Here,
they present us our window to examine the wider topic of force,
motion, and movement in general.

## Motion

The distance an object has moved is given by the difference between
its initial location and its final location. That is, $$x _1 - x _0$$.

Speed can be defined as the amount of distance moved in a given
timeframe, and so it follows we can calculate it by dividing distance
by time. The [SI
units](https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-guide-si-chapter-4-two-classes-si-units-and-si-prefixes)
for distance and time are metres and seconds, giving us a unit for
speed of metres per second (or m s<sup>-1</sup>).

<div class="important-note">$$\text{speed} = \frac{\text{distance}}{\text{time}}$$</div>

Note that distance is a _scalar_ quantity --- it measures only
magnitude, not direction. If we add direction, it becomes a _vector_
quantity, namely *displacement*. If we replace distance with
displacement in the above equation, we have the equation for
*velocity* --- the vector of speed plus distance.

Average velocity is given by:

<div class="important-note">$$\text{velocity} = \frac{\text{displacement}}{\text{time}}$$

$$\vec{v} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t}$$</div>

The symbol Δ is the Greek letter delta, which symbolises a change in a
given quantity.

Instantaneous velocity can be approximated by taking average velocity
over increasingly small intervals but to obtain an exact figure more
advanced mathematics must be used.

Now, it would also be useful to be able to calculate rate of change in
velocity, i.e. *acceleration*. Now, you might think of acceleration as
increase in speed, but in scientific terms that's not precisely
correct. Acceleration measures _change in velocity_, which has two
consequences which may not be immediately obvious:

* An object slowing down has a measurable acceleration --- simply a
  negative one (which can also be referred to as deceleration);
* A change in direction but not speed is also a measurable acceleration.
  As a consequence of measuring a change in a vector quantity,
  acceleration is itself a vector quantity.

So how do we measure acceleration? We divide the change in velocity by
the time that change takes. Assuming we're measuring velocity in m
s<sup>-1</sup> and thus time in seconds, that gives us a unit of
metres per second per second, or m s<sup>-2</sup>.

<div class="important-note">$$\text{acceleration} = \frac{\Delta\text{velocity}}{\text{time}}$$

$$\vec{a} = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t}$$</div>

Acceleration is the first derivative of velocity. The second
derivative of velocity --- the rate of change of acceleration --- is
*jerk*. The third derivative of velocity --- the rate of change of
jerk --- is *jounce* (or snap).

## Motion with constant acceleration

For an initial velocity _u_ (in m s<sup>-1</sup>), a constant
accleration _a_ (in m s<sup>-2</sup>) and time _t_ (in s) velocity and
displacement can be given by:

<div class="important-note">
$$v = u + at$$

$$s = ut + \frac{1}{2}at^2$$

These can be manipulated to produce:

$$s = \frac{1}{2}(u+v)t$$

$$v^2 = u^2 + 2as$$

$$s = vt - \frac{1}{2}at^2$$
</div>

## Mass

So now we can measure the way things move. We also need to measure how
much of a thing there is, that is, its *mass*. Mass tells us how much
matter there is in an object, and the SI unit for mass is the
kilogram. *Kilograms do not measure weight, they measure mass.* Weight
is a measure of the gravitational force acting on an object. It is
different on different planets and, to a lesser extent, even in
different places on Earth.

## Newton's first law of motion

<div class="important-note">An object will remain at rest or in uniform
motion in a straight line unless acted on by an external force.</div>

So, if an object is stationary it will remain stationary unless a
force puts it into motion. This seems like common sense. So does the
fact that an object in motion will not change direction unless a force
causes this to happen.

What may seem less obvious is that an object which is in motion _will
not stop or slow down_ unless a force causes it to do so. We are not
used to objects moving on endlessly without slowing because our
intuition has developed on Earth, where a number of forces cause
objects to slow and stop. Most commonly, friction and air resistance.

### Friction

*Friction* is the force between two surfaces which are moving (or
attempting to move) relative to each other. Friction will always act
to slow down or stop an object.

### Overall forces

Most objects on Earth will have many forces operating on them at any
one time. These will include gravity and air pressure. In order to
determine whether and how the object will move, the total force acting
on the object must be determined. This is called the *resultant* or
*net force*. This will take into account the magnitude and direction
of each force and combine them.

## Newton's second law of motion

<div class="important-note">$$\text{force} = \text{mass} \times \text{acceleration}$$
$$F = ma$$</div>

So Newton's second law tells us we can find out the force acting on an
object by multiplying its mass by its acceleration. For example, if I
have a mass of 80 kg and am accelerating at 2 m s<sup>-2</sup> there
is a force of 160 kg m s<sup>-2</sup>. Now because "kg m
s<sup>-2</sup>" is both common and unwieldy, we have the equivalent
unit of *newtons*. That is:

<div class="important-note">1 N = 1 kg m<sup>-2</sup></div>

A specialised form of the second law can be used to convert mass to
weight. We must use _acceleration due to gravity_ which on Earth can
be approximated as 9.81 m s<sup>-2</sup>. It is generally regarded as
a constant as any differences due to location are likely to be
negligible.

<div class="important-note">$$W = mg$$</div>

## Newton's third law of motion

<div class="important-note">If an object A exerts a force on an object B,
object B will exert a force on object B which is equal in magnitude
but opposite in direction.</div>

Often expressed as "for every action there is an equal and opposite
reaction", this law defines the *reaction force*. It tells us that,
for example, if you try to push a brick wall with a force of 1 N, it
also pushes back with a force of 1 N. Similarly, objects being pulled
by Earth's gravity also pull on the Earth with an equal force to that
being exerted on them.

These three laws lay the groundwork for all forces and motion in the
known universe, and are fundamental in physics and engineering.

## Momentum

Momentum is the product of mass and velocity --- it is mass in motion.

<div class="important-note">$$\text{momentum} = \text{mass} \times \text{velocity}$$

$$p = mv$$</div>

Momentum is thus given in kg m s<sup>-1</sup>. Like energy, momentum
is always conserved.

*Inertia* is an object's fundamental resistance to changes in its
velocity. The higher the objects mass the higher its inertia. This
inertia must be overcome in order to change an objects momentum.

An *elastic collision* is one in which kinetic energy is conserved,
i.e. none is converted into other forms of energy. In real life there
is no such thing as a perfectly elastic collision but it can be useful
for modelling.

As acceleration is given by $$\frac{v _{2} - v _{1}}{t}$$ and we have
seen $$F = ma$$, we can see $$F = \frac{m(v _{2} - v_{1})}{t} = \frac{mv _{2} - mv _{1}}{t}$$.
The expression $$mv _{2} - mv {1}$$ gives us change of momentum, so
we can see that force is equivalent to rate of change of momentum.

### Impulse

If we rewrite the above expression as $$\Delta (mv)$$ we have
$$F = \frac{\Delta (mv)}{t}$$. The quantity Δ(mv) is generally referred
to as *impulse*.

<div class="important-note">$$\text{impulse} = \text{force} \times \text{time}
= Ft = \Delta (mv) = \text{change in momentum}$$</div>

Generally impulse is written as N s.