---
layout: post
title:  "Renewable energy"
category: engineering-notes
tags: physics engineering
---

## Wind power

<div class="important-note">
Power available in the wind is given by

$$P = 0.5\rho Av^3$$

Where P is power in W,
<em>ρ</em> is air density in kg m<sup>-3</sup>,
<em>A</em> is the area through which wind is passing (e.g. area swept by turbine rotor),
<em>v</em> is air speed in m s<sup>-1</sup>.
</div>

The typical maximum efficiency of a wind turbine is around 40%. A
small increase in wind speed can lead to a large increase in power
generation due to the _v<sup>3</sup>_ in the equation.

## Hydroelectric power

In modern large-scale hydroelectricity generation, water is stored in
high-level reservoirs then released downhill. It passes through
generating turbines on this journey. Hydroelectric power is limited by
finding suitable locations. It has a typical efficiency of around 80%,
losing some energy to overcome friction in the pipes.

One variation of hydroelectricity is _pumped storage_ in which water
is pumped uphill using power from the national grid during periods of
low demand, then used to generate power during periods of high demand.

## Tidal power

### Tidal barrages

Tidal barrages use the change in height of water to extract potential
energy. They are also known as _tidal range systems_.

A low dam, or barrage, is built across the estuary of a suitable
river. Water flows through inlets until the tide reaches its maximum
height, then the inlets are closed. Once the tide has begun to fall,
they are opened again and water flows back out. Power is generated by
both the incoming and outgoing tide.

### Tidal stream systems

These extract the kinetic energy of the moving water. Underwater
turbines are used, similar to submerged wind turbines.

## Wave power

To generate power from waves their up-and-down movement must be
converted into a form which can drive a turbine. A number of
prototypes have been tested and larger scale schemes are now being
planned.

## Geothermal energy

The internal heat of the Earth is harnessed. This originally stems
from the gravitational contraction of the planet during its formation
and is augmented by heat from substances radioactively decaying in its
core.

In parts of the world aquifers are warmed by hot rocks, and the water
in these aquifers can be used for heating buildings or electricity
generation. It is then pumped back underground to reheat.

## Solar energy

See [Light and solar energy]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-12-28-light-and-solar-energy %}).