---
layout: post
title:  "Chemistry intro"
category: engineering-notes
tags: chemistry chemical engineering
---

## Chemical engineering

Chemistry has evolved from a rather hit-and-miss process of examining
how materials react together into the science it is today, allowing
materials to be designed to meet specific criteria based on knowledge
of their underlying chemical bonds and atomic structure. Chemical
engineering uses this science to produce chemicals, energy, foods,
pharmaceuticals and other products.

## Fundamental particles

Atoms are made up of neutrons, protons and electrons. The protons and
neutrons (collectively the nucleons) can be thought of as forming the
nucleus, while the electrons surround them.

A proton and neutron have roughly the same mass; one atomic mass unit
(a.m.u.).

<div class="important-note">$$1 \text{a.m.u.} = 1.66 \times 10^{-27} \text{kg}

(to 3 s.f.)</div>

An electron has a mass of $$\frac{1}{1800}$$ of this, a mass so small
it can generally be approximated to zero and thus ignored.

Neutrons are electrically neutral, protons positive and electrons
negative, each with an equal but opposite charge. This charge is
termed the elementary charge and given the symbol *e*.

<div class="important-note">$$e = 1.602 \times 10^{-19} C$$

(to 4 s.f.)</div>

## Nuclear reactions

Nuclear reactions are any reactions which take place between or within
the nuclei of elements. In a fusion reaction two or more nuclei fuse
to form a larger nucleus, creating new elements. These reactions take
place in stars. Fission reactions involve the division of a nucleus
into two or more smaller nuclei, again creating new elements. These
happen in conventional nuclear reactors.

Most reactions, however, are not nuclear. It is the outer electrons
which form chemical bonds.

## Ions

A neutral atom has an equal number of electrons and protons; their
charges cancel one another out. If an atom gains one or more electrons
it will have a negative charge and become a _negative ion_. If it
loses one or more electrons it will have a positive charge and become
a _positive ion_.

## Chemical bonding

Atoms combine with one another to form molecules by forming chemical
bonds. A molecule may contain only a single element or it may be a
_compound_ of different types of atom.

There are different types of chemical bonds:
o Ionic bonding --- one atom "gives" one or more electrons to another;
o Covalent bonding --- one or more electrons are "shared" by two atoms;
o Metallic bonding --- atoms become separated from their original nuclei
  and move through the structure as "free electrons".

## Reading the periodic table

The _atomic number_ of an element is equivalent to the number of
protons in its nucleus. The _mass number_ is the sum of the numbers of
protons and neutrons, but the periodic table generally states the
_atomic mass_ which is the average mass of a large number of atoms.

## Isotopes

Isotopes are different forms of the same chemical element with
different numbers of neutrons but the same number of protons.

## The mole

The _mole_ (SI symbol mol) is defined as the amount of substance that
contains the same number of constituent particles as there are atoms
in 0.012 kg of carbon-12, i.e. 6.02Ã—10<sup>23</sup> (known as the
Avogadro constant). For all practical purposes, one mole of an element
is its atomic mass, in grams.

The concentration of a chemical substance in a solution is generally
measured in moles per litre (mol l<sup>-1</sup>).

## Acids and alkalis

Acids are liquids with a high concentration of hydrogen ions
(H<sup>+</sup>), an alkali one with a low concentration. This is
measured on the pH scale. The scale is logarithmic as the
concentration varies from 10<sup>-1</sup> to 10<sup>-14</sup>.