---
layout: post
title:  "Temperature and heat"
category: engineering-notes
tags: force physics engineering
---

## Heat & temperature

Temperature is the measure of how hot or cold an object is. Heat
energy will always flow from a higher-temperature to a
lower-temperature object.

The SI unit for temperature is the *kelvin*. 0 L is equivalent to
_absolute zero_, i.e. no thermal energy. *Degrees Celsius* are more
commonly encountered than kelvin, however. A change of 1 °C is the
same as a change of 1 K, but 0 °C represents the freezing point of
water rather than absolute zero.

<div class="important-note">0 °C = 273.15 K</div>

## Specific heat capacity

In order to know how much thermal energy is required to raise an
object to a given temperature we must know its *specific heat
capacity*. The heat capacity of a substance tells us how much energy
is required to raise its temperature by a given amount (generally 1
K). The _specific_ heat capacity makes this more useful by scaling it
to be applicable to 1 kg of the substance (specific means "per unit
mass").

<div class="important-note">$$\Delta Q = mc \Delta T$$</div>

Here _ΔQ_ is heat energy required, _m_ is mass, _c_ is specific heat
capacity and ΔT is temperature difference.

## Heat transfer

Heat can be transferred in three ways:

<dl>
  <dt>Conduction</dt>
  <dd>The vibrations of atoms or molecules are transferred to other
  atoms or molecules by direct contact. Conduction is most important in
  solids. When it does occur in fluids it is termed <strong>diffusion
  </strong>. Some materials are better <strong>conductors</strong> than
  others. Poor conductors are called <strong>insulators</strong>.</dd>
  <dt>Convection</dt>
  <dd>The primary heat transfer mechanism in fluids, this is when hotter
  molecules move around more than cold ones, moving further apart. This means
  they are less dense and so begin to rise above the cooler, denser fluid
  which moves down.</dd>
  <dt>Radiation</dt>
  <dd>Heat being transferred by electromagnetic waves. This requires no
  substance to move through and can thus even travel through a vacuum.</dd>
</dl>

*Thermal management* is the use of heat transfer mechanisms to keep a
system within given temperature bounds.

## Specific latent heat

While a substance is changing from one form to another, e.g. melting
or evaporating, its temperature will stay the same. Energy is required
to complete this change of state but will not affect the temperature
until the change is complete. The amount of heat energy required is
called the **latent heat of fusion** (for melting and freezing) or the
**latent heat of vaporisation** (for boiling or condensation).

<div class="important-note">

<strong>Specific latent heat of fusion</strong> is the amount of heat
energy, in joules, required to change 1 kg of a substance from a solid
to a liquid at its melting temperature. It is given as

$$\Delta Q = mL_f$$

Where _ΔQ_ is amount of heat energy absorbed or released, _m_ is the
mass of the substance changing state and L<sub>f</sub> is the
substance's specific latent heat of fusion.

<strong>Specific latent heat of vaporisation</strong> is the amount of
heat energy, in joules, required to change 1 kg of a substance from a
liquid to a gas at its boiling point. It is given as

$$\Delta Q = mL_v$$

Where _ΔQ_ is amount of heat energy absorbed or released, _m_ is the
mass of the substance changing state and L<sub>v</sub> is the
substance's specific latent heat of vaporisation.